---
layout: post
title: Machine Learning - Is it for you ?
---

In this post, I will at a high level describe this field and answer some of these questions -

What is Machine Learning ?
What are the prerequisites to learn this subject ?
What are the career opportunities in this field ?
What are the latest trends in Machine Learning ?

To start, let me begin by saying that Machine Learning is not new. It has existed in various shapes and forms for a long time and work in this field is being simultaneously pushed forward by those researchers in signal processing,computer science,statistics,neuroscience and many other departments. At its bare minimal level, Machine Learning asks the question, given the data that I have, can I collect information that is useful to process future data. This is the fundamental difference with data analytics which asks the fundamental question, given the data that I have, can I collect information that is useful for me right now to describe it and take intelligible action. Of course, both areas of work are more similar than they are different as without understanding the data right now, it would not be easy to process future data. 

To dive in a bit deeper, as you would have guessed by now, machine learning deals with a lot of data. A very simple machine learning problem would be, given some data, learn enough about it to understand the model, then use that model to predict future data. To start learning this subject, it would be advisable to have a basic background in linear algebra, probability theory, calculus, and programming in Matlab and Python/R. Why? Lets find out.

Linear Algebra - Representation and transformation of data. Any input data has many fields to it like an excel spreadsheet with multiple columns. This data is represented as a matrix and to learn the model, we would do some algebra with this matrix. Thus the importance of linear algebra.

Calculus - Given the data, we want the best model to predict future data. Sounds familiar? It is a maximization problem. In machine learning, we often deal with min/max problems and knowledge of Calculus is essential.

Probability - Many times while predicting data, we may not want to predict as a single answer as very rarely can we predict with 100% certainty. Rather, a softer approach would be to represent results as probability of multiple events and herein is the importance of concepts such as expectations and probability theory.

Programming - Given all the theory about matrices and transformations, it is a little tedious to use complicated data structures in traditional languages such as C++. Matlab readily ingests data as matrices and is great for linear algebra and hence very easy to prototype machine learning models. In addition, It is useful to know to code in 1 scripting language such as python as it supports scientific programming with libraries such as numpy,sklearn,theano and provides an interface for traditional programming to create applications.

Know that these concepts can be picked up on the go or may not be needed at all if the intention is to apply machine learning to applications. However, for a career in research or graduate school in machine learning, it is advantageous to be strong with these fundamentals beforehand. 

The Andrew NG course on Coursera (https://www.coursera.org/learn/machine-learning) is a very famous starter module. Another resource that I have found very useful is the Scikit documentation (http://scikit-learn.org/stable/documentation.html). They cover almost all algorithms and you can choose to understand at a deeper level from the internet based on your interest and also implement it very easily and see results. A highly recommended programming platform that I use for scientific computing is Jupyter Notebook. It is fantastic. (http://jupyter.org/)

In terms of career opportunities, there are many different roles available depending on your balance between quantitative and programming skills. Assuming knowledge of machine learning, some roles include 

Strong Quant+Strong Programming - Opportunities in finance as Quant Analyst\Data Scientist

Strong Database Fundamentals+Strong Programming - Software Engineer in Machine Learning

PhD in ML - All of the above + Research labs and Academia (self driving cars,ai in robotics,…)

Data scientists in most companies analyze user/log data and use it to improve efficiency in various areas to boost revenue. Work could range from recommendation systems, business intelligence,data center optimization etc.. Quant Analysts try to understand the high velocity financial market data to provide better insights into investment management. Software Engineers in ML generally work on pipelines that can handle data for machine learning models on a large scale. Again, I have generalized to provide an idea of the various roles and there will be overlaps between roles and requirements for those roles.  

Machine learning is a trend on its own, but within it, deep learning is now more trendy. Deep Learning is nothing but huge neural networks. Neural networks are a set of layers that contain functions that transform data in each layer before passing to the next layer. These include functions such as Tanh. So in a way, deep learning is learning the best way to use bunch of Tanh functions in multiple layers that can help best correlate input to network and output from network. Sounds quite different now and that is my point. An improvement in this field and machine learning in general would require expert knowledge of mathematics in the above mentioned core areas.Also do note that if the goal is implementation of already discovered algorithms and build systems with it, understanding scalable and distributed machine learning along with some frameworks such as Apache Spark would be handy to build the next cool app. 

A reason for curiosity in Deep Learning is because it has been observed that these deep networks can learn representations and generalize well as seen by the famous Atari game player by DeepMind that could learn to play Atari games that it was not specifically trained for. This could potentially be very useful in the ultimate aim to create generic intelligence that learns like humans rather than intelligence for a specific problem domain that it was prepped for. The reason for the popularity in deep learning now is the low cost and also better infrastructure that can handle training these huge networks (Amazon AWS GPU Nodes) and accessibility to developers through libraries such as Theano. Machine Learning and Deep Learning are only going to grow with the continuous influx of data in various forms including computer generated data. With the popularity of sensors, this data is going to blow up. If infrastructure quality and costs can keep pace with the rise in data, we can expect more people to enter this field from various domains over the next 10-20 years which would lead to more amazing applications.

